# Possibilities of Gradient Boosting in Predicting Mortality in Patients with Acute IHD on the Background of Acute Cerebral Circulation Failure


Purpose of work. Build a GBM (gradient boosting) machine learning model that predicts outcome in patients with ischemic cerebral infarction (ICI) complicated by acute coronary artery disease.

Idea. The use of machine learning algorithms to determine the real state of affairs in a particular patient, based on data from previous observations, can be useful in triage and determination of patient treatment tactics.

Materials and research methods. A retrospective analysis of 3523 case histories of patients with ICI who were inpatient treatment at the Grodno Regional Hospital of Medical Rehabilitation for the period from 2016 to 2019 was carried out, of which 113 developed acute forms of coronary artery disease. An object-feature matrix was formed with the following features: gender, age, localization of cerebral infarction, presence of atrial fibrillation (AF), form of acute coronary artery disease, glomerular filtration rate (GFR), presence of pathological Q-wave (Q-MI), presence of diabetes mellitus (SD), outcome: death, life.

Statistical analysis of the obtained data was performed in Python 3. Two independent groups were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test. Fisher's exact test was used when comparing percentages. Differences in the groups were considered statistically significant at a significance level of p <0.05.

The analysis was carried out in the Python 3 program, the statistical analysis was carried out in the SciPy library, GBM in the H2O library. The data were randomly divided into training (80%) and test (20%) samples. Target parameter: life, death. The training was carried out on a training sample, and the analysis of the quality of the model, on a test sample. The selection of hyperparameters was carried out using the grid search algorithm using cross-validation. Quality metrics: AUC (area under the ROC curve), sensitivity and specificity.

Results. The selected patients were divided into 2 subgroups (SG) depending on the outcome. SG1 was 61 patients with a lethal outcome, SG2 - 52 surviving patients. The average age in SG1 is 78 ± 7.8 years, in SG2 - 75.6 ± 9.8 (p = 0.12), In SG1 there were 47 women (73.4%) and 30 men (26.6%), in SG2 - 36 (50%) women and 16 (48%) men. In SG1, 2 (3.3%) patients had unstable angina (UA), myocardial infarction (MI) - in 59 (96.7%), of which 26 (46%) people had Q-MI. In SG2, NS was in 23 (44.2%) patients (p <0.01), MI - in 29 (55.8%) patients, of which 7 (24%) people had Q-MI. In PG1, diabetes was in 30 patients (49.1%), in SG2 - in 11 people (21.2%) (p = 0.04). AF was detected in 35 (57.4%) patients with SG1 and in 36 (69.2%) patients with SG2. The medina GFR (ml / min / 1.73 m2) in SG1 was 33 (25; 43), in PG2 - 48 (38; 69) (p <0.01). Analysis of the quality of the model: AUC on the test sample - 0.99. The sensitivity of predictions on the test sample was 100%, the specificity was 91%.

Conclusion. The demonstrated effectiveness of the constructed machine learning model on the test sample allowed us to predict with 100% sensitivity the outcome in patients with IHI complicated by acute forms of coronary artery disease, thus, the introduction of this algorithm into practice can contribute to the choice of adequate tactics for monitoring and treating this category of patients. Despite the impressive metrics of the quality of the model, there is a flaw in the specific implementation: patients with IHI combined with myocardial infarction are known to be in the category of patients with a high risk of death and should be defined as patients in serious condition. Also, the therapeutic range of possibilities in this category of patients is significantly limited, due to the specificity of the mutual aggravation of diseases, when therapy aimed at improving the prognosis for MI can lead to a deterioration in the prognosis for IHI. On the other hand, the use of this kind of machine learning models can be extremely useful in the case of other pathological conditions. What can allow to plan an approach to therapeutic and rehabilitative measures, based on the data of a particular patient, as an approximation to individualized medicine.
